An hour,
Tony.
Right. Um, just about all in the room.
Thanks very much for, um, your attendance today, minister
and, um, officials.
So, um, we've got you until five 30.
Um, we'll leave it in your capable hands.
Okay. Well, thank you for finding me along.
Uh, I guess I would just probably start with, um,
uh, I don't know if how many of you have seen the, um,
press release, but, uh, today we announced the, um,
what would you call it, moving to an confidence of absence
around mycoplasma bovis.
So pretty important milestone in, um,
the fight against that disease.
It's been a lot of hard work from, uh, not only ministry,
but the industry partners,
but most importantly,
the farmers themselves, hell of a lot of them.
And Mark, you know, this only too well, uh, went
through a hell of a lot of pain
and anguish, um, with what had to happen on their farms.
And that's a massive burden that, um, those farmers sort
of bore for the entire country.
I know, um, my involvement
with the International Dairy Federation,
I was hearing from overseas as to the impacts that
that disease had on a lot of other countries
and their farming systems
and how much of a challenge it was proving to a lot of them,
uh, having to live with that disease.
And so, you know, I think this is a really, you know,
we've done something no other country could do in terms of,
um, getting to this point.
And so hopefully in the, you know, we're on track by 2028
to have eliminated it.
Um, I guess also in biosecurity
with mentioning we had the fruit flying incursion earlier,
or was it about this time last year?
Um, two of them. And they were handled very successfully.
Uh, obviously we've got the hornet, I keep wanting
to say wasp, but no, the hornets, um, uh,
happening right now.
And that's obviously ramping up to be a reasonably sizable
campaign and our efforts to eliminate them and remove them.
And I think also with the HPAI, um,
we've obviously had the program down in Dunedin over this
last year to, uh, remove that from that farm
that was successful.
And then the operational agreement with industry, um, on
how we manage that and being prepared for that.
That's, uh, quite important I feel.
Uh, on terms of operational agreements,
we obviously had the one around foot
and mouth that was also announced.
Um, in terms of food safety, I guess the key things I would,
uh, point to in that regard is just generally a number
of areas we were looking at, um, I'd say is
removing red tape.
Um, trying to streamline the process
and system, uh, to, you know, ensure that we can
not add to the cost of food.
Um, what do we need to do to ensure that food's safe
and looking for ways of being smarter
and more efficient in all aspects of how we do that.
And we've got a food act improvement plan that's underway.
Now, obviously the announcement around cake makers was sort
of the first deliverable on that, and there's more to come.
Um, and obviously a CVM, um,
that continues, you know, for a number of industry,
they're concerned around the timeframe it's taking
to get products into the country.
Recently signed an MOU with Australia to try
and harmonize our system much more with Australia so that,
um, in future, if you register in one country, then the
other country will accept all of the work that was done by
that other country and only require, you know,
what may be relevant, uh, to New Zealand
and our unique environment.
Uh, animal welfare, obviously, I'm sure you'll want to talk
to me about, um, pig regulations.
Um, so I guess keep the points there.
I would make, um, this is about
making sure we can have them in the faring crates for
as little time as possible to save
as many piglets as possible.
And that is the sole focus around that of, um, achieving
that balance, which is the key thing you're
after in farming is balancing everything up.
You can't be siloed in your thinking.
Uh, I think with that, I will leave it to you guys.
Okay. So what we're gonna do is
focus on biosecurity first.
Yep. Animal welfare, and then finally food safety.
So for the last, the two, um, caution of it.
So Joe's got the first question.
Thank you. Um, nice to see you minister.
Thanks for coming along and thanks for the team as well.
Coming along. I want to ask you specifically about kpa Yep.
And the hornet,
but I'll start with Kpa, if that's all right.
Yep. So there was a report done earlier in the year
that said it was going to, uh, cost $9.4 billion right.
To our economy. You disputed that
saying you weren't quite sure.
You know, it could be debatable on the numbers.
Um, but what are you seeing the impact of Kapa
to our communities in New Zealand is,
and if you like, I can rattle
through my other three quick questions
to go alongside if you want. Or do you wanna do them
One at a time? I'll do
'em one at a time. So in terms of the impact,
obviously we saw with the cyclone there was a big impact in
terms of, for those communities
where it all washed up on the beach,
big rotting stinking mess.
Mm-hmm. Um, but in terms of the, the science
of what we're starting to understand is
that yes, I stick by that original statement
that perhaps it may not be that much of an impact.
Um, the, we've had quite a significant dieback of it
in a number of areas.
And um,
also there's been some al work done looking at actually
what is the impacts on marine ecosystems.
Um, and I think, uh, team can correct me if I'm wrong,
but from my recall of that work, it was
where you've got the solid mats, yes, there may be, um,
some impact, but where it's sparse, um, actually
I think I read that, um, you actually get a bit more
of a environment for, um, microinvertebrates
and other things, and maybe the impact isn't so high.
Our goal is still to, uh, reduce and eliminate.
Um, but it's, you know, I guess where we're at the moment,
we've launched the strategy on the weekend, uh,
where we're sort of focused on that education, that control.
And I think that's gonna be the key part of it,
is making sure we can reduce down that spread,
particularly when we've got, had this dieback occur.
Um, you know, uh, having everyone aware of, you know,
when you drop an anchor, if you pick something up,
then bag it, bin it, uh, and prevent that spread.
And so that's probably gonna be a, one of our key things is
that education, that awareness, uh,
utilizing the controlled, um, area notices we've had, the,
the research that's been done has, uh, so there's the UV
C treatment and the chlorine tub
of both been reasonably successful.
Obviously we think we can perhaps refine those a bit more
and get the cost down.
So if we do need to do, um, removal,
then those are tools that are available to us.
Uh, the rover, uh, we are sort of,
I guess that had had been a bit of a slower burn project.
There was getting parts
and stuff from Scotland, believe that's underway.
Our challenge now is, um, well, there may not be enough RA
to test it on, um, where it's, um, based.
Um, so yeah, the, the mats
and up in, um, the bay in the Bay of Islands
where this was gonna be the test bed, um,
they've had a dieback of, uh, up to 9200% wasn't.
Yeah. Yeah.
So that might be a bit of a challenge in terms of completing
that research because the, the problem ain't there to fix.
So supplementary. Yeah. Um, thank you Mr. Chair.
So, uh, on the back of that response, you know, the dieback,
are you sure it's not just going
to be a seasonal type dieback, a small, like, like there was
that that other time, but also, um, you mentioned there,
you know, about there not really being much of an impact
for community, but have you done a cultural analysis of
that given that, um, for Hapu
and Iwo Iwi, um, Ana as a,
as a traditional source of, of food for them?
So have you done any cultural analysis on the
impact of Kapa for them?
And sorry, what was the first part of that? Was the,
Was around the eight, this is the
dieback. Do you know if it's
Small? Yeah, yeah.
So I mean, we dunno,
and that's part of what we'll be researching more
with niwa in terms
of truly understanding what's going on there
and having a clear understanding as to
is this just a one-off event due to mm-hmm.
Freak na, uh, nature event,
or is this something we can expect more of?
Is this something we can utilize actually in terms
of removal, uh, in terms of cultural impact,
the cultural impact around fish stocks?
Like I said, the, the data
or the science from niwa seemed to say
that perhaps it wasn't as big as had been estimated.
Um, and I mean, I think John can probably talk
to you at some point if you want, around, um, what that sort
of science is showing.
But, you know, I don't, I stick by the fact,
I don't think it's this huge multi-billion dollar impact,
um, at this stage.
It's not what we're seeing from.
But you haven't done a cultural impact analysis?
Uh, well, we've done lots of research with niwa, um,
in terms of, we've heard from the community, we've,
you know, you've had iwi, you've been involved
with the steering group and fed into that,
and so they're fed into the strategy.
So my final suck then is do you agree with the assessment
of Nicole and McDonald, see of the settlement trust
who said government isn't taking it a serious as they need
to, and if not, why not?
Well, Nicola has been part of, she was chair of our,
she was strategy group.
She, uh, put forth the strategy to us.
I think, uh, we have paid a lot of attention to this.
Um, so, you know, we've invested in the last two years,
$15 million
or about there, um, into this in terms
of finding solutions to remove it.
So I think that given the tight fiscal times,
we find ourselves in, it's, um,
a substantial investment in it,
Mr. Chair. Right.
Um, gonna move on to Mark.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And sorry everyone for my absence.
Um, I am in isolation waiting
for a transplant of all things.
Um, minister, thank you so much for your time today.
Biosecurity is obviously a huge issue.
The Embo announcement is fantastic,
and full disclosure, as you noted, I have it on farm.
And this is perhaps a question as much for you, sir, as, as,
as John sitting behind you, T 29, we, we acknowledge
that maybe the vector was semen amongst other things.
The question I really have is, now that we've learned
through this program and all the, all,
all the difficulties the program presented to farmers,
if T 29 was potentially semen, why wasn't T 21?
Uh, that's more of a science question.
I, I don't think anyone ever said it wasn't. Yeah,
Yeah.
So, so could you say, say that
for the record so I can hear that. Sorry.
So Grace said he didn't think anyone had actually said
that T 21 wasn't, um, the result of semen.
I think from what I've seen, um, most of the
evidence now is pointing, pointing to the fact that it was,
uh, imported semen.
That was the victor that, uh, caused this.
Yes. Thank you, minister.
And do, do you think in the early parts of the program, the,
obviously we hadn't had the learnings that we now have
that mistakes were made in terms of
how the program was officiated, given the mental illness,
wellbeing issues that were often part of, you know,
hurt eradication, do you think?
Uh, well, obviously I can't speak to that as minister, uh,
because I wasn't a minister at that point in time.
Yes. Um,
but I was obviously involved in the periphery
through federated farmers.
And I think, you know, if you look at changes we're making
to the biosecurity Act, we've put in a number of
learnings from the M Bovis program into the changes
to the biosecurity act, like having the, um, uh,
disputes panel as being formalized within
the biosecurity act.
Obviously early on there was, um, you know,
farmers didn't have the same point of contact.
Um, and also there wasn't that support for them.
Uh, you know, I heard many stories of people
who had ring up one week
and then the next week they'd call the same number,
but it was a different person they were talking to.
And that did cause a lot of stress.
And I think those lessons have been well
and truly learn going forward.
Thank you, minister. Right. Uh, next is Sue.
Um, hi. Yeah. Thank you for being here today.
Uh, you mentioned the bird flow or the HPAI. Oh, yeah, yeah.
And I was just wanting to ask you about, I know that
that's had a, the fact that that was,
I mean, I think there're only two farms.
One farm affected one. Yeah.
But there's been a long term, long tail of businesses
that have been affected
because they can't export products to China.
Yeah. Still. And, um, and I think the canned products,
and they're accepted, but I'm thinking about, in particular,
a large pet food company in my electric where
because it's an extruded product, it still can't be used.
And although the rules are gonna change
to allow heat treated stuff like these, it's gonna happen.
But when is that gonna be, when is that gonna go? Sure.
I, I, I just got back from China on Saturday
and have signed the agreement that, uh, allows
for the heat treated, um, uh, transfer of pet food.
So that frees up about $35 million worth
of export earnings back into
The Fantastic. So,
So that's done For those guys.
When can they put them on the ship
and start sending them over? What does that mean,
Steven?
Uh, I dunno the exact date, but, but essentially, um,
This year or next year?
Absolutely. What, uh, well, it's December.
Um, the Chinese, the head Chinese CU China customs
and I, at my level, have signed the agreement Brilliant.
To allow for what the transfer of pet food on,
I don't know if there's any further export.
What they'll have to do is they'll, they'll have
to publish an overseas market access requirements update,
um, so that all companies can get on and, and do that.
So I, I imagine that'll happen this month.
There's nothing standing in the way of it. Yeah.
And I think, um, key thing here is obviously once you lose
a country of free
or freedom, country of freedom, by the way,
around status in terms of one of these diseases,
then you obviously can't export if
that is a requirement from where you're exporting to.
And, you know, there was nothing any of us could have done
because the disease came here, we had it.
Um, and I think, so part of the thinking we've got
to do going forward is do we want to go
through the long process of reapplying for that country
of freedom status when it could very well happen again,
like it did in Australia.
They'd gone through the process to reget it,
and then, oh, it would've been only been a week
or so later, um, they had it pop up again.
And so I think part of our thinking has been around
how do we, you know, have agreements with other countries,
um, around, you know, what are the proce like,
like ray's done here?
What are the processes to enable export
to still continue if we don't have
that country of freedom status?
Because as we all know this, it's slowly,
thankfully slower than we might've worried moving
around Antarctica.
Um, I believe it's, I'm pretty sure it's, uh,
got to herd island, um, out there in the South Indian Ocean.
And so it probably is, you know, the potential there is,
you know, it's a, a couple of years away
that it might hit here.
And so the focus needs to be on how can we keep operating
as a country if this disease gets here
because it will become endemic.
So those are the things we need to be working, working on.
And this is what, what you've signed is gonna prevent.
It's Been a really good, should there be
future outbreaks?
Well, well, well, because we've changed the standard.
So it's been a really good achievement by my people
and the, with the Chinese colleagues to get to a point
where we agree to change to the market access requirements
and to try, so it's now only raw product that can't Yeah.
Can't go to an ingredient. So, as I said,
it's worth about 35 million to New Zealand food industry.
So it's, it's a good move.
Yeah. Oh, thank you.
That's awesome. Great news. Well done.
Right, Steve, last question on biosecurity.
The added of biosecurity should surely be
extension time saves nine.
Yes, correct.
Repair was another good one.
Your government has cut.
Uh, this established 108 roles in biosecurity,
which is the biggest cut in all of the NPI jobs lost.
We have no shortage of major issues
with longstanding incursions, such as widening pines
and new incursions, such as the yellow leg hornet.
And whilst your government has,
in a sense been the beneficiary of decisive action
around mycoplasma bovis by the previous government,
and we're all glad that that's been dealt with,
is there a risk that your legacy minister will be
that will see wilding pines getting worse,
Madagascar rag wart getting worse
and yellow leaked hornets taking hold here
because you've actually cut the biosecurity defense net
that we need in this country? Well,
I dispute that, and I think number of you have sent in,
um, W PQS that I've seen recently asking
what those job numbers were.
And I'm, I can't remember the number off the top of my head,
but correct me if I'm wrong, the frontline staff
and biosecurity had actually gone up.
So there's more people focused on the frontline than they
had previously been.
Yes, there was some back office roles
that were disestablished.
Um, but there is more of a focus now on the frontline.
I think, you know, in terms of hornets,
we are working really effectively.
We have gotten in, uh, experts from around the world
to give us advice
and tell us their view on what needs to happen.
We are listening to that advice
and making decisions based on that advice.
As you know, the situation changes.
So look, I look at a number of things we've done, um,
and I think actually we're moving forward on this.
You know, it's, yeah, the operational agreement around foot
and mouth had been languishing for about a decade or more.
Uh, I gave a clear direction that I wanted that sorted.
We got sorted, um, you know, fruit flight,
we sorted that out.
Avian flu, we've sorted that out.
So I think the team is doing a damn good job.
And they're being effective in managing these issues.
No, probably not. Yeah.
No, we're gonna have to move on to the next topic.
So, um, we're moving on to animal welfare, um,
as a, a theme for the next section of this, um, hearing.
And, uh, Rachel has a question.
Thank you, chair. Um,
minister, I'll jump straight into it.
Why were the SBCA not included in consultation in the law
that is currently going through the parliament?
When the fork industry were, obviously they were, uh,
they were consulted in 2022 under labor,
but they weren't under the specific, uh, legislation.
And I understand they asked you on a number of occasions
for updates on what was happening for, uh, PEG code.
So why were they excluded from consultation with your office
and with, uh, NPI?
Well, they only asked, uh, best of my memory.
They only asked me once on that.
Um, and that was only a couple of months ago in terms
of why, I mean, they've,
their point was their position was extremely clear.
And, you know, we needed to work on
what would work for the pork industry.
These are the people that are gonna be affected the most.
They were the ones that are gonna have their livelihoods put
at risk, um, by any changes.
Those were the people I needed to talk about and talk to
and work out, okay, what is a solution
that not only improves welfare,
but leaves behind a pork sector
that is economically sustainable?
So have you read the article in the listener that, um,
that quotes, um, any de from, uh, SA haven't,
but also, um, scientists just
regarding the summary science summary from NPI,
which is basically dismissed by vets and by scientists
and more welfare experts?
Well, I mean, that science summary was, um, you know,
there's studies in there that did the meta-analysis
of a whole thousands of studies
and showed that, you know, the key point here is
you'll have a 14% higher relative risk of piglet mortality
under a free farrowing system,
Which is actually, uh, disputed, um, by, uh,
a recent study from the European Food Safety Agency.
So that wasn't included in the summary.
Some of the most recent, um, research,
Well, you've still got thousands of pieces
of research that were included.
And I mean, I mean, I think, you know,
the key thing here is there's this assumption
that farmers wait on, um,
instructions from government as to how to farm.
They basic, you know, if there's a smart way
of doing things, farmers will adapt and they will do it.
And they will look for ways that, um, you know,
not only enhances the welfare of their animals,
but also their survivability and profitability.
Steve, stop on this. Who prepared that science summary?
Can you tell us that? Uh,
I can't know who was the precise author of it, but John.
John, yep.
Is that the answer, John? Yeah.
John, obviously It's nice of you to bring him up. Yeah.
We might get a chance to ask you some questions
at the end of the week, I think, John.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely. So I might, there was, there was a,
there was a team that prepared it,
but I was involved in that team.
Right, absolutely. That's useful to know. Thank you.
No worries. Um, Mr.
Minister, I've got, uh,
an image from taken from a Ana Laki farm
a few weeks ago. Yep.
What's this Where, uh,
this is a taranaki taranaki faring crate?
I think so I'm happy pigs and faring crates.
There's one dead piglet there underneath,
which is another image of that if you wanna see it up close.
We don't need to This would you agree,
is not legal under our Animal welfare act to have, uh,
mother pigs and cages like
that based on the 2020 high court finding?
Well, no, the 2020 high court finding said that, um, that
how the rule was put in place was done incorrectly, uh,
or the process followed.
And obviously that, uh,
pigs been in a faring quite crate for 33 days,
did not meet the purposes of the act, so
not crate itself.
And so that's what we're looking at.
How do we minimize that time in the crate
to only what's necessary to save
as many piglets as possible.
Now, you're not gonna save every piglet,
and I dare say po I would love to know
how many more piglets died that night
because someone broke into that property
and scared all the pigs around.
Uh, so why do you reject the advice
of your National Animal Welfare Advisory Council that
the best welfare outcomes for mother pigs
and piglets is moving away from faring crates?
Well, no, I don't think they said that.
Um, they, they did, no.
Well, I mean, the analysis I had was, I mean,
they could only look at the south in terms of that.
Um, the advice I've got is, like I've said,
14% higher risk of mortality.
Um, the key thing here is, you know,
that we've gotta make sure
that it's not just the sour, it's the piglets as well.
You've gotta balance everything up.
It's not a perfect world in terms of farming.
There's a number of things going wrong, uh,
happening at the same time.
And you've gotta come up with a smart balance.
And that's what we've tried to do here, is achieve
that balance between not only the sow's welfare,
but also the piglet's welfare.
One of the reasons you've articulated for
the choice you've made to keep faring crates going Yeah.
Uh, the status quo for another 10 years,
and then a change to the wiener and grower piglet cages.
Yeah. But not a change in the size of the faring crates.
A reduction in the length of time
that sales must spend in those only
after 10 years is the cost to farmers.
But the advice to you was that a 350 South Farm
would face a capital cost of approximately 507,000.
Yeah. For the option that you've chosen the legislation.
And yet moving to the Naac option, which would be a removal
of cell, of, um, fairing crates entirely would cost
for a 350 cell farm, 595,000.
So that's only a 17% difference.
But it eliminates that problem
of faring crate as part of our system. Why?
But it doesn't eliminate that ongoing for that.
So it doesn't, um, doesn't remove
that ongoing operational cost.
And that is what kills you in a business.
If you have to bake in a fact that you're gonna make a loss
of a hundred thousand dollars a year every year going
forward, that's the re that's the major cost.
Yes. Capital cost, you can get a loan, you can do all that,
but that ongoing fact
that your business is gonna be less profitable by
that amount every year that I was,
that was the key thing around actually.
That's what adds on the extra cost to
that Naac proposal. Have
You prioritized that consideration over the consideration
of animal welfare in your responsibility
as the minister of animal welfare?
So in terms of the co the economics, that was the basis
for the transition period in terms of the welfare that the,
the issue that was why we went to minimize the length
of time they could spend in the Crate to Max,
and they would give us the best piglet survivability.
So the welfare of both SOW and Piglet
NPI recommended that you could get rid of mating cages
by the 1st of July, 2026.
You've opted to give 10 years more for mating cages.
Why have you chosen that when clearly it,
there's no new infrastructure needed.
It's simply a change in management practices,
Uh, in terms of that.
I mean, they, we looked at it as a whole package
and said, we'll do this as one package.
Um, but I mean, that's something we can look at. Mm.
So I've just got us up around the timeframe
because, um, the pork industry would've been happy
with a five year transition.
Um, why 10 years? Why such a long time?
Uh, to wait for what are minimal
improvements in animal welfare?
Basically because of the absolute mess we're getting at
the moment around the, uh, resource management system.
Um, you are looking at farmers having to spend
$40,000
or more to just
to get a consent renewal is the feedback from the latest
Federaled farmers survey.
So all of us work,
it's gonna require consent renewals for all of these properties.
They're all gonna have to, you know,
they're making major changes.
They're probably gonna be changing their effluent systems,
which will likely result in a need
to change their consent conditions.
So we've got a program of work that will, you know,
have this replacement in for the RMA,
which will give a lot more certainty
and reduce some of those costs
that people are facing in terms of these consent renewals.
Now that's gonna take about estimate
around four years to fully implement.
So I wanted them to be able to not have to spend upwards
of $200,000
or more that I'm seeing some farmers being faced
with when they have to, to go
through a notified consent process.
I want them to be able to spend that on their business
because if they're having to go through this process
where they're getting all of those RMA costs,
potentially on top of the physical costs they've gotta do,
um, I'm sorry,
we won't have a pork industry in
this country. That's too much. But isn't it
Your to promote the animal welfare considering
that your responsibility is the animal welfare
Minister? And that's why, that's
why we came up
with the decisions we did around the length
of time in the store.
But in terms of transition, I think that's important, um,
to have that timeframe for people to achieve those changes.
Because if we don't have, um, a decent time
for these people to make these changes, then quite frankly,
you're gonna end up with mainly pork in this country being
produced offshore at probably worse rates.
And I know, Steve, you've got a bill,
Um, sues.
Do you think that essentially farmers,
including all pig farmers, are intrinsically aware
of the health of their animals
and that's vitally important to them?
Uh, if the animal isn't healthy, they don't produce.
Um, I mean it's, I've known that
for a long time on a dairy farm, cow has to be healthy
to make milk
The end of review. Yep.
Mr. Chair? Um, yes, mark. Thank you, Mr.
Chair. Um, minister, um, going back to gra pigs
and the K values in the areas that were increased,
do you think it's a fair, um, assertion that, that,
that in some instances the advice you were getting
didn't understand the social nature
of especially grower pigs that often gravitate
to an area in their store, which is often under a heat lamp,
um, and that some of the investment
proposals were inordinate expensive
for a little benefit to the pigs?
Yeah. Well, what I've, my visits to pig farms, certainly
what I've seen is you go in through the grower space
and basically they're all sort of
lying in a big rolling mold, uh, on top
of each other in one corner of the pen.
And the rest of the pen's effectively empty.
Now, obviously, and I, I think a key point is that a lot
of people miss is with this grower space,
that the pigs will start with a growing space
that is quite a high K value.
And it's, when they get to that point of 0.34,
that's when they shift to the next,
or at the moment it's 0.30.
But that's when they get to that size,
that's when they shift.
Um, and so they might only be at that actual K value
for a day or two before they shifted to an area with, um,
to a new pen with more area for them
to continue growing into.
Righto. Um, so we're getting way off, um, tack here
'cause we should be looking at the 24 25 financial.
So, um, Steve's got a another question.
Yeah. In terms of 24 25, a different line
of questioning on live animal exports, um, you
what work has actually been done on completing the
commitment to reinstating live animal exports?
And why is the timeline blown out on that?
Um, is it in the two hard basket
and is it something your government is
quietly kicking to touch?
Uh, well, the, the work has been completed.
It's in front of, um, cabinet in terms of,
uh, those discussions.
I can't really go into
When can we expect some,
When I've got something to announce, I'll announce it,
But it's still in train.
It's still there. Yep.
In June, you said that legislation would be ready soon,
and we're nearly six months on from that point.
So have you got an updated, uh, definition of soon
When I've got an announcement to make, I'll make it. So
Is it still soon?
Um, I can't really say,
Is it because other coalition
partners are starting to get cold?
I can't talk about what happens in cabinet, you know that,
Right. We're
moving on. Keep going. Hang on.
We've got to move on to food safety.
Right. So food safety, who
is first off cab off the rank there,
Got a question on food safety, if you want,
You go, you go. Right. I'll
Go. Hey,
thank you for having me.
Primary production, um,
I'm interested in the assure quality meat inspections
and have asked, uh, questions in the house.
And WP Q's minister, uh,
you weren't Yeah, unfortunately today. Yeah, right.
I did watch online. Yeah. Good. Yeah. Exciting.
Um, and so probably these questions are similar to that,
and one of them is the jobs loss where,
or the potential for jobs loss at Assure Equality
with the changes that you're consulting on.
So there's 650, um, trained assessors.
What, what are you expecting to happen to their jobs?
Well, I mean, that's all I'm up
for consultation at the moment.
Nothing's been decided,
so I can't say whether there'll be job losses or not.
Um, what I can say is that, uh, this model's used by
17% of the industry
and, um, there hasn't been a issue at all with any
meat coming from that part of the industry.
So on the, on the 17%, then the minister who responded
to my questions, uh, I asked him, why,
why has there not been any risk assessment done?
No. And he said potentially that that 17%
that you refer to was the risk assessment.
So have, have you asked for any risk assessments
or are you basing this all on?
Hang on, Mr. Chair. Yeah.
Is, is this relate to this financial
Year? Oh, no.
Yes it does,
because of course, these meat inspections
that the minister is talking about
have been going on for some time.
Well, if you could, since 2013, if you could
Frame your question in a way that's around, well,
either the financial year or planning,
Well, I'm, I'm doing it based on
what this minister is saying, that since 2013,
approximately 17% of the meat inspections have occurred,
not through assurer quality, through a different mechanism.
And I'm asking if he has requested any risk assessments
or had any commentary around that 17% that have been,
if he's asked for a risk assessment about that,
or if he's received any negative commentary.
No, I haven't. Um, well, aside from the unions,
I haven't received any negative commentary, um,
in terms of food safety.
Um, I'd also point out that, correct me if I'm wrong,
but this, um, this applies to domestic make
for consumption as well.
So the same system. Yeah.
So we've haven't seen, um, any issues
with domestic meat supply at all.
Um, so, you know, it's, there's a proven track record of
the fact that we are able to ensure
that meat is produced safely.
Um, I think the more you want to throw costs
and, uh, layers of scrutiny over something,
then that adds to the price of the food.
And forgive me for saying,
but we seem to spend a lot of time in that house, um,
complaining about why mince costs so much
Commentary. Does
what Steve's question. What do you mean?
No, I've hardly asked any questions. I've get
You're focusing on this financial year,
not last financial year.
Well, That's what the Review's
about. I'm focusing on
Piece work. That is,
I'm rolling it out. You're rolling out
Something out. So, I mean,
the answer is simple. I haven't
Request a risk assessment just answered,
hasn't requested a risk assessment,
Steve. Yeah.
How can you rule it out? Okay, I'm gonna try
and make it clear
that it's about the previous financial year.
Yeah. Uh, you made determinations recently on the use
of glyphosate, uh, correct.
In baring notes and barian oats
and, uh, wheat, which were appreciated
that the level didn't go up.
Question. Um, what are your, what is your knowledge
of the use of glyphosate
as a dessicant on crops specifically grown for cow feed,
including bailage straw, standing grass?
Um, uh, I would've pretty sure that,
uh, it isn't allowed under my supply
and condition agreement with Fonterra.
It isn't. I'm pretty sure I could be wrong.
I don't recall. Um, it has been, it has been a,
I I wouldn't, no, actually, yeah,
so I can't, I can't recall.
I know there's been discussion on it.
Um, I don't, do we have any rules? Can
Can I, can I offer some thoughts?
Yes. Yep.
I believe you are correct. I believe you are correct.
It was the, it was discussed and proposed,
but there were no preconditions that said it, it,
it was prohibitive activity
to spray out a crop before it was harvested. Yeah.
So it's prohibited activity.
No, it wasn't a prohibited activity.
It wasn't, it's not a prohibited activity. Yeah.
It's, it's off-label use
that's not prohibitive or not prohibited.
Sorry. It's not used.
I mean, it is, you use it to spray out a paddock. Yeah.
Yeah. So
that paddock will be going into crops. Yeah, yeah. Before you
Plant it. Okay. Okay.
But what about using it?
Um, so what are the risks then, where it is being used
as a diskin for crops
that are specifically grown for animal feed?
Are you aware of those risks and, and, well, it's,
It's, no.
Why would you? I don't believe there are any crops
that you would use it on
for animal feed.
Um, right. You will spray out a paddock to put it into, um,
a crop, but you're not,
and if it's particularly, it's a fodder crop,
then you use the animals to graze it.
Um, if it's maize, then you harvest it.
Um, you don't, yeah, I, I can't think
of any crop you would of what you're suggesting
Corrects I can help Steve, uh, supply feed to
the dairy industry in the past.
Mm-hmm. They have, um, required a,
a declaration that no glyphosate's been used to, um,
uh, on the crop that is going to animal feed.
So it's up to the individual companies, I think, to do that.
And is, is There anything you want check in?
I got a final one is on, is on,
which perhaps you can answer as well, is on the monitoring,
uh, of residues in I only food crops,
but feed crops and also potentially in, um, animal product
that has come from feed that may have had been
In terms of residue monitoring.
There is a program that NPI sweets food safety NZ have
perhaps once you can
Talk to it, um, the, probably the most relevant, um,
ongoing monitoring program we have for glyphosate.
And that would, that would show up if there was a problem
with animal feed is milk testing.
Yes. So we do test for glyphosate
as a core part of our milk testing.
Yeah. We have never found glyphosate, residues and milk.
That would be a very quick indicator if
we had a problem with feed.
Mm-hmm. Secondly, feed is not covered by the food act,
but the food that's produced by the feed is,
Yeah. Right.
Rachel, do you have a question?
Yeah. Thank you. Um, going, going back to meat inspections
in the relevant year, um, I'm interested in the,
I've got two points, and I'll say them
both, so you can answer them both.
One is, minister, you responded
to my earlier questions talking about the domestic market.
Um, and I'm wondering if you, if in your view,
the same rule should apply for the domestic market
as the export market.
That's my first question.
And then my second one is, um, are you surprised to learn
that I've, uh, people contacting me saying
that they are very concerned about the 17% at the moment
that doesn't go through, assure equality
and that there are problems
and that there should be a risk assessment?
Okay. In terms of the first one, am I, do I think they sh
uh, no, because obviously other countries set their
standards as to what they want.
That's their decision. We've got our own standards as to
what we think is appropriate.
If we were to go to, uh, standards
that perhaps were at, um, equivalent to our highest,
um, ex uh, country, we export
that may be quite frankly over the top, then
that's adding cost to New Zealand's consumers.
So our focus is on
what do we realistically think is important to ensure that,
uh, food is safe and available for New Zealanders.
In terms of, I mean, I've got no idea
what comes into your email inbox.
Um, I'm sure there are unions that are upset, uh,
by what has been proposed. Um, I,
This is a, this is in addition to the unions.
The unions are very upset about the potential loss
of 650 jobs.
But I'm talking about people who are talking about
that the existing 7%, 17% that don't go
through the sugar quality mechanism.
Well, like I said,
there it is been operating for a long time.
No actual issues have been showing up in any inspections
or product testing or anything like that. And
No risk assessments and you're not gonna ask for them.
Is that correct? Or, or will you
after this now asked for one
Be quite frank?
Probably not. 'cause I think we've got better
things to spend our money on.
Nine. Right. One minute. Um, time is up. We're at time.
5, 3, 9. I make it Jim,
Five. You got a one minute
question, Steve. Five. Do
You got one? I do.
Okay. One minute question.
Well, I do have any problem with us defining vegetarian
and vegan food as has been done in the uk, for example,
as an explicit definition so that it's clear for both
consumers and for the public.
Oh, it's, it's really up to,
uh, them.
I don't think it's our, our job's
to define what's safe. Well,
It could, can include a safety component
because it could include
avoiding dairy products, for example.
Well then that's your allergens labeling.
So if you want to avoid that,
you look at your allergens labeling.
So I mean, the risk
of us doing everyone's dietary preferences, again,
adding cost to food.
I think our focus just needs to be on food safety, cut
and paste from British legislation.
Chuck, it now is just the definition.
I'd have to look at it. Steve couldn't
give you an answer right now.
I'm sure There's a problem with it. Thank you.
Good. See you, minister. You sure? There is a problem?
There's no problem.
Thank you. Thanks Andrew.
Thanks Rob. Thank you all. Thank you Andrew. Cheers guys.
See you soon.
You still.